
[[PAGE 1]]
Deep Learning Based Energy Disaggregation and On/Off
Detection of Household Appliances
JIE JIANG, QIUQIANG KONG*, MARK D. PLUMBLEY, and NIGEL GILBERT, University of
Surrey, United Kingdom
MARK HOOGENDOORN and DIEDERIK ROIJERS, VU University Amsterdam, Netherlands
Energy disaggregation, a.k.a. Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring, aims to separate the energy consumption of
individual appliances from the readings of a mains power meter measuring the total energy consumption of, e.g.
a whole house. Energy consumption of individual appliances can be useful in many applications, e.g., providing
appliance-level feedback to the end users to help them understand their energy consumption and ultimately
save energy. Recently, with the availability of large-scale energy consumption datasets, various neural network
models such as convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks have been investigated to solve
the energy disaggregation problem. Neural network models can learn complex patterns from large amounts
of data and have been shown to outperform the traditional machine learning methods such as variants of
hidden Markov models. However, current neural network methods for energy disaggregation are either
computational expensive or are not capable of handling long-term dependencies. In this paper, we investigate
the application of the recently developed WaveNet models for the task of energy disaggregation. Based on
a real-world energy dataset collected from 20 households over two years, we show that WaveNet models
outperforms the state-of-the-art deep learning methods proposed in the literature for energy disaggregation
in terms of both error measures and computational cost. On the basis of energy disaggregation, we then
investigate the performance of two deep-learning based frameworks for the task of on/off detection which
aims at estimating whether an appliance is in operation or not. The first framework obtains the on/off states
of an appliance by binarising the predictions of a regression model trained for energy disaggregation, while
the second framework obtains the on/off states of an appliance by directly training a binary classifier with
binarised energy readings of the appliance serving as the target values. Based on the same dataset, we show
that for the task of on/off detection the second framework, i.e., directly training a binary classifier, achieves
better performance in terms of F1 score.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: energy disaggregation, non-intrusive load monitoring, deep learning
ACM Reference Format:
Jie Jiang, Qiuqiang Kong*, Mark D. Plumbley, Nigel Gilbert, Mark Hoogendoorn, and Diederik Roijers. 2019.
Deep Learning Based Energy Disaggregation and On/Off Detection of Household Appliances. 1, 1 (August 2019),
19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
*Corresponding author.
Authors’ addresses: Jie Jiang; Qiuqiang Kong*; Mark D. Plumbley; Nigel Gilbert, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey,
GU2 7XH, United Kingdom, jie.jiang,q.kong,m.plumbley,n.gilbert@surrey.ac.uk; Mark Hoogendoorn; Diederik Roijers, VU
University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1081 HV, Netherlands, m.hoogendoorn,d.m.roijers@vu.nl.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
XXXX-XXXX/2019/8-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.
arXiv:1908.00941v2  [cs.LG]  5 Aug 2019

[[PAGE 2]]
2 J. Jiang et al.
1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, several large-scale household energy consumption datasets are made publicly
available, e.g. UK-DALE [15] (UK Domestic Appliance-Level Electricity) and REFIT [21] (Person-
alised Retrofit Decision Support Tools For UK Homes Using Smart Home Technology). These
datasets boost the studies on energy disaggregation, also known as Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring
(NILM) [10]. Energy disaggregation is a challenging blind source separation problem that aims
to separate the energy consumption of individual appliances from the readings of the aggregate
meter measuring the total consumption of multiple appliances for example in a house. Figure 1
gives an example of how the energy consumption of a whole house changes along with that of
the individual appliances. This problem is difficult due to a number of uncertainties such as the
existence of background noise, the lack of knowledge on the numbers of different appliances and
their true energy consumption patterns in a given household, replacements of old appliances, and
overlapped operations of multiple appliances with similar energy consumption patterns.
Energy disaggregation finds its usefulness in many applications. For example, disaggregated
data could be used by feedback systems to provide pertinent information about energy usage
and educate consumers at opportune times [6], which in turn helps the consumers better control
their consumption and ultimately save energy [ 5]. Disaggregated data may also help identify
malfunctioning equipments or inefficient settings [7]. For policy makers, knowing the amount
of energy each category of appliances consumes is critical to the development and evaluation
of energy efficiency policies [27, 28]. Disaggregated data may also provide valuable information
to facilitate power system planning, load forecasting, new types of billing procedures, and the
ability to pinpoint the origins of certain customer complaints [7]. Another application is to help
researchers understand the occurrences of home activities which nowadays are heavily related
with the usage of different types of appliances [13].
Fig. 1. An example of energy consumption of individual appliances and a whole house
In the literature, a lot of research has been done on applying machine learning methods to the
problem of energy disaggregation. Among the popular approaches, different variants of HMMs
(Hidden Markov Models) such as FHMMs (Factorial HMMs) have attracted a lot of attention
[18, 25, 33]. With the availability of large-scale open datasets such as UK-DALE and REFIT [15, 21],
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 3]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 3
there is a flourish in applying deep neural networks (DNNs) to the problem of energy disaggregation.
For example, in [14] and [32], the authors investigated the application of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and Autoencoders. However, there are several
problems with the conventional DNN models. The computation complexity of the conventional
CNNs is getting substantially high when the input sequences are long. In the case of RNNs, the
values of the hidden units have to be calculated in a sequential order and thus does not scale well.
Recently, a neural network called WaveNet [30] was proposed for long sequence audio processing.
WaveNet is a variant of the CNN architecture with dilated convolutional layers which make it easier
to be trained with long sequences compared to the conventional CNNs. With skip connections
over all the convolutional layers, it can learn multi-scale hierarchical representations. WaveNet
has been proven to work well for tasks such as speech synthesis [30] and speech denoising [24]. It
is efficient because it has fewer parameters than a CNN does. WaveNet is also easy to parallelise
compared to RNNs. For the task of energy disaggregation, some appliances may have long-term
dependencies in their energy consumption patterns and these patterns may exist at different scales.
Therefore, the task of energy disaggregation may benefit from WaveNet’s capability of modeling
long sequences and learning multi-scale hierarchical representations.
To evaluate the performance of WaveNet models for the task of energy disaggregation, we carried
out a set of experiments using the public dataset REFIT [ 21], and compared the disaggregation
results of WaveNet models against the five-layer CNN model proposed in [32] and a three-layer
RNN model. We showed that WaveNet models outperform the other two methods in terms of both
error measures and computation cost. We also investigated the influence of the length of input
sequences on the disaggregation performance as well as on the computation cost.
While the problem of energy disaggregation focuses on estimating the exact amount of energy
being consumed by an appliance, there is another interesting task called on/off detection which tries
to predict whether individual appliances are in operation or not. Compared to energy disaggregation,
on/off detection provides a perspective of a coarser granularity on the usage status of individual
appliances and finds its usefulness in understanding the occurrences of home activities that heavily
depend upon the assistance of household appliances such as kettle [ 1], washing machine and
microwave [13]. Such dependencies have been proven, for example, to help with activity monitoring
and health management [1]. In this paper, we investigate two learning frameworks for the task of
on/off detection. The first one, called regression based learning framework, first trains a model for
energy disaggregation using the aggregate energy readings as inputs and the appliance readings
as the target values, and then derives the on/off state sequence of the appliance by binarising the
predictions of the disaggregation model according to the on-power threshold of the appliance. The
second one, called classification based learning framework, directly trains a binary classifier with
the appliance on/off states.
To evaluate the two learning frameworks for the task of on/off detection, we respectively trained
a group of WaveNet models following the two learning frameworks with the REFIT dataset. We
showed that for the task of on/off detection the classification based learning framework outperforms
the regression based learning framework in terms of F1 score.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose to tackle the problem of energy diaggregation with WaveNet models which are
capable of modeling long sequences more efficiently compared to the conventional CNNs and
RNNs, and we show that WaveNet models achieve the state-of-the-art performance based on
a set of experiments with a public dataset.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 4]]
4 J. Jiang et al.
• We carry out an analysis on how the receptive field size and the target field size would affect
the disaggregation performance of the three deep neural networks, i.e., WaveNets, CNNs and
RNNs.
• We compare a regression based learning framework with a classification based learning
framework for the task of on/off detection and show empirically that the latter outperforms
the former that utilises the outputs from energy disaggregation.
• The evaluation is performed using the public dataset REFIT collected from 20 households.
We give a detailed description of how the raw data was preprocessed and used for model
training and release the source code1 to facilitate the reproducibility of our work.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related work. Section 3
gives a formal description of the energy disaggregation problem and the on/off detection problem.
Section 4 presents three learning paradigms for model training, introduces three neural network
models, and describes how a model is trained respectively for the task of energy disaggregation
and on/off detection. Section 5 illustrates the experiment preparation and analyses the experiment
results. Finally, in Section 6, we conclude the paper with possibilities of future work.
2 RELATED WORK
In the literature, a lot of research has been done on applying machine learning methods to the
problem of energy disaggregation. Among the popular approaches, different variants of hidden
Markov models (HMMs) have attracted much attention (e.g. [ 16, 18, 22, 25, 33]). Recently, with
the availability of large open datasets such as UK-DALE and REFIT [ 15, 21] and the superior
performance of deep neural networks (DNNs) in many research areas such as computer vision [19]
and audio processing [24], there has been a flourish on applying DNNs for the problem of energy
disaggregation. For example, Kelly and Knottenbelt [14] compared the disaggregation performance
of the traditional machine learning methods (e.g. FHMMs) with the deep learning methods such
as Autoencoders and Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) networks and the results show that the
deep learning methods outperform the traditional methods. Mauch and Yang [20] also advocated
the application of LSTM for the problem of energy disaggregation. Chen et al. [ 2] proposed a
convolutional sequence to sequence model in which gated linear unit convolutional layers were
used to extract information from the sequences of aggregate electricity consumption and residual
blocks were used to refine the output of the neural network. Later, Zhang et al. [32] proposed to
use a sequence-to-point paradigm to train a CNN for energy disaggregation which outperforms the
sequence-to-sequence learning approach used in [14]. There are also works using a combination of
DNNs. For example, by combining CNNs with variational autoencoders, Sirojan et al. [29] showed
that their approach outperforms the one presented in [32]. Shin et al. [26] proposed a subtask gated
network that combines the main regression network with an on/off classification subtask network.
Targeting real-time applications, Harell et al. [9] proposed a causal 1-D CNN based on the WaveNet
model proposed in [30]. This work is similar to ours as it also adapts WaveNet for the problem
of energy disaggregation but our work differs from this work as we use a non-causal version of
WaveNet proposed in [24], i.e., the same amount of samples in the past as well as in the future
are used to train the model and inform the prediction. Another difference is that we employed
the concept of target field as proposed in [ 24] such that the computation of the neighbouring
samples can be shared, which speeds up the model training and inference. In addition, we carried
out an extensive study on how the receptive field size and the target field size influence the model
performance. Moreover, the baseline used in [9] is a variant of HMM, i.e. sparse super-state HMM,
while we compared our work with the state-of-the-art DNN based approaches.
1https://github.com/jiejiang-jojo/fast-seq2point
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 5]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 5
3 PROBLEM STATEMENT
3.1 Energy Disaggregation
Energy disaggregation aims to estimate the energy usage of individual appliances based on the
readings of the mains power meter that measures the total energy consumption of, for example, a
whole house. Formally, suppose we have a sequence of readings from a house-level meter denoted
as X = (x1, x2, . . . ,xT ) where T is the length of the sequence. The problem of energy disaggregation
is to disaggregate X into the energy consumption sequence of individual appliances denoted
as Y i = (yi
1,yi
2, . . . ,yi
T ),yi
t ∈ R≥0 where R≥0 = [0, +∞), I is the number of known appliances,
i ∈ { 1, . . . , I } is the appliance index and t ∈ { 1, . . . ,T } is the index of samples in time domain. In
addition, we denote the readings from unknown appliances and background noise asU = (u1, ..., uT ).
At any time t, xt is assumed to be the summation of the readings from all the known appliances
and unknown appliances with background noise:
xt =
IÕ
i=1
yi
t + ut (1)
where the residual term ut indicates the energy consumption of unknown appliances and back-
ground noise at timet. The aim of energy disaggregation is to design a model to separate the energy
consumption of the individual appliances Y i , i ∈ { 1, . . . , I } from the aggregate readings X . That is,
we are looking for a set of disaggregation mappings:
f i : X 7→ Y i . (2)
where each mapping f i maps from an aggregate reading sequence X to the energy consumption
sequence of an appliance Y i.
3.2 On/off Detection
On a coarser granularity, most appliances have an on-power threshold which defines the least
amount of energy an appliance needs to operate. When the amount of energy an appliance is
consuming is below the on-power threshold it is considered to be in an off state otherwise it is
considered to be in an on state. For example, a kettle usually needs 2000 watts to be in an on state
while a washing machine needs 20 watts. The problem of on/off detection aims to estimate whether
an appliance is in an on or off state based on the readings of the total energy consumption.
Formally, given a sequence of aggregated readings from a house-level meter denoted as X =
(x1, x2, . . . ,xT ) where T is the length of the sequence, the aim of on/off detection is to design a model
to recognise the on/off state sequence of individual appliances denoted as Z i = (zi
1, zi
2, . . . ,zi
T ),
zi
t ∈ { 0, 1}, i ∈ { 1, . . . , I }, t ∈ { 1, . . . ,T } from the aggregate readings X where I is the number of
known appliances, i is the appliance index, t is the sample index in time domain, 0 indicates the off
state and 1 indicates the on state. That is, we are looking for a set of mappings:
f i : X 7→ Z i . (3)
where each mapping f i maps from an aggregate reading sequence X to the on/off state sequence
of an appliance Z i.
4 METHODS
4.1 Learning Paradigms
Usually the aggregated readings X is a long sequence over days, months, or sometimes years. To
efficiently train a model, a commonly used approach in the literature of energy disaggregation
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 6]]
6 J. Jiang et al.
is the sliding window approach which splits the long sequence X into shorter sequences x =
(xt , ..., xt +L−1) where L indicates the receptive field size. Instead of learning the mappings in
Equation 2 and Equation 3 directly, we use sequences x as input. The target of an input sequence
can be a sequence of the same length which is called sequence-to-sequence learning [14] or the
midpoint of the target sequence which is called sequence-to-point learning [32]. In this section, we
introduce three variants of the sliding window approach.
4.1.1 Sequence-to-sequence Learning. Sequence-to-sequence learning [14], as shown in Figure 2 (a),
was proposed to learn a mapping from an input sequence x to an output/target sequence y, where
x = (xt , ..., xt +L−1) and y = (yt , ...,yt +L−1) have the same length. In sequence-to-sequence learning,
each element of the output signal is predicted many times and an average of these predictions is
used as the final output, which consequently smooths the edges. However, as pointed in [32], it is
expected that some of the input sequences will provide a better prediction of a single point than
others, particularly those sequences where the point is near the midpoint of the input sequence.
4.1.2 Sequence-to-point Learning. Sequence-to-point learning [32], as shown in Figure 2 (b), aims
to solve the problem of sequence-to-sequence learning by finding a mapping from an input sequence
x = (xt , ..., xt +L−1) to a single target pointyt + ⌊L/2⌋ the index of which corresponds to the midpoint
of the input sequence, where ⌊· ⌋ floors a value to an integer. One problem of the sequence-to-point
learning paradigm is that learning a single point is usually inefficient.
4.1.3 Fast Sequence-to-point Learning. In this paper, we propose to use a fast sequence-to-point
learning paradigm, as shown in Figure 2 (c), to speed up the sequence-to-point learning. By intro-
ducing a target field [24] to replace a single point as output, the computation of a sequence-to-point
model can be shared. The input sequence and target sequence are denoted as x = (xt , ..., xt +L+r −2)
and y = (yt + ⌊L/2⌋, ...,yt + ⌊L/2⌋+r −1) respectively. The length of the input sequence in this case is
(L + r − 1) where L indicates the size of the receptive field, andr indicates the size of the target field,
i.e. the length of the target sequence. When r = 1, fast sequence-to-point learning degenerates to
sequence-to-point learning.
Fig. 2. (a) Sequence-to-sequence learning; (b) Sequence-to-point learning; (c) Fast sequence-to-point learning.
4.2 Deep Neural Networks
In this section, we introduce three classes of neural network. The first two, CNNs and RNNs, serving
as two baselines are used to benchmark the performance of WaveNets.
4.2.1 Convolutional neural networks. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved the
state-of-the-art performance in many applications such as computer vision [19], speech and audio
processing [24] and natural language processing [4]. With shared filters to capture local patterns of
various signals, the number of parameters of a CNN is fewer than that of a fully connected neural
network.
Time domain CNNs have been applied to energy disaggregation, for example, in [32]. Similar
to the two dimensional CNN for computer vision [ 19], a time domain CNN consists of several
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 7]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 7
convolutional layers, each of which contains several filters that are used to convolve with the
output of the previous convolutional layer. The filters are designed to capture local patterns of a
signal. For example, in computer vision, the lower level filters of a CNN may learn edge detectors,
while the higher level filters may learn to capture high-level profiles of an image. Similarly, in the
case of time domain CNNs for energy disaggregation, lower level filters may capture the short-term
energy usage patterns of different appliances such as a single activation, while higher level filters
may capture the long-term patterns such as a complete operating cycle.
The time domain convolutional operation can be described as follows:
v[kout , t] =
Õ
k i n
mÕ
τ =1
u[kin , t −τ] · h[kout , kin ,τ] (4)
where u andv denote the input and output feature maps of a convolutional layer, and kin and
kout indicate the index of the input and output feature maps. The filters are represented as a three
dimensional tensor h and m is the filter length in time domain. The first convolutional layer takes a
sequence x as input. The predicted output is obtained from the last convolutional layer of a CNN.
With larger receptive fields, long-term dependencies in the energy consumption data can be
taken into account. However, the computation complexity of CNNs will increase quadratically
along with the size of the receptive field.
4.2.2 Recurrent neural networks. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have many successful ap-
plications in modeling temporal signals, e.g., audio and speech signal processing [8] and natural
language processing [3]. Similar to the fully connected neural networks, each input sample xt is
mapped to a hidden unit ht by a transformation matrix. In addition, there are connections between
adjacent hidden units to carry on the information from previous samples. In a non-causal system, a
RNN can be bidirectional so as to use information from both history and future. A recurrent layer
of a RNN can be described as:
ht =ϕ(W xt + V ht −1 + b) (5)
where W , V and b respectively represent the transformation matrix between input samples and
hidden units, the transformation matrix between adjacent hidden units, and a bias term;ϕrepresents
a non-linear function. A RNN may consist of several recurrent layers. The backpropagation through
time algorithm [31] is used for training a RNN.
One problem of the conventional RNNs is gradient vanishing/explosion [23]. This is because
the depth of a RNN is proportional to the length of the input sequence. When training a RNN, the
gradient will accumulate exponentially, which makes the training unstable. To solve the gradient
explosion/vanishing problem, LSTM was proposed, which introduces a memory cell with update,
forget and output gates to control the information flow [11]. Later Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)
[3] was proposed to simplify LSTM by reducing the number of parameters. A GRU is described as
follows:
rt =σ(Wr xt + Ur ht −1 + br )
zt =σ(Wzxt + Uzht −1 + bz )
eht =ϕ(W xt + U (rt ⊙ ht −1) + b)
ht = zt ⊙ ht −1 + (1 − zt ) ⊙ eht .
(6)
where rt indicates the reset gate at time step t, zt indicates the update gate at time step t, eht
indicates the candidate new value for the memory cell at time step t, ht indicates the final value
for the memory cell at time step t,σrepresents a sigmoid (non-linear) function andϕrepresents a
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 8]]
8 J. Jiang et al.
tanh (non-linear) function. The units that learn to capture short-term dependencies will tend to
have reset gates frequently active while the units that learn to capture long-term dependencies will
tend to have update gates frequently active.
4.2.3 WaveNets. Conventional CNNs cannot scale when the input sequences are getting long as
the computation complexity increases quadratically along with the receptive field size. Compared
to CNNs, the computation complexity of RNNs increases linearly along with the receptive field size.
However, the hidden units of RNNs can only be calculated sequentially because the calculation
of each hidden unit depends upon the value of the previous hidden unit. So RNNs cannot handle
parallel computations efficiently. Therefore, long sequence modeling has been a computational
challenge for both CNNs and RNNs.
Fig. 3. An example of the WaveNet input-output structure for energy disaggregation.
To solve this problem, WaveNet [ 30] was proposed for modeling raw audio signals and has
been used for modeling time sequences in tasks such as speech denoising [ 24]. WaveNet is an
improvement over conventional CNNs, where a “dilated convolution” is applied to reduce the size
of filters. A dilated convolution is a convolution with holes. That is, the filters are applied over
an area larger than its length by skipping input values with a certain step size. Stacked dilated
convolutions enable a network to have very large receptive fields with just a few layers. In [30]
a filter length of 2 is applied for modeling the causal audio signals. In this paper, following [24],
we applied a filter length of 3 to utilise the non-causal information of input sequences. Figure 3
shows through an example the WaveNet input-output structure used in this paper for both tasks of
energy disaggregation and on/off detection. Following [30], the dilated layers are embedded into
residual blocks, as shown in Figure 4. The residual output of each block will be sent to the input of
the next one. The skip output of all the residual blocks will be summed and then followed by a
3 × 1 convolutional layer, which gives the final output as predictions.
The following equation characterises the relation between the number of dilated convolutional
layers of a WaveNet and its receptive field size:
L = (2s − 1) ∗ (m − 1) + 1 (7)
where L denotes the receptive field size, s denotes the number of dilated convolutional layers, m
denotes the filter length applied to each dilated convolutional layer and in this paper we set m = 3
following [24].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 9]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 9
1 ×1 conv.1 ×1 conv.
×
+Residual output Skip output
Dilated conv.Dilated conv.tanhσInput
Fig. 4. Residual block of WaveNets.
Since WaveNets do not have recurrent connections [30], they are typically faster than RNNs,
especially when applied to long sequences.
4.3 Training a Model For Energy Disaggregation
For the task of energy disaggregation, the training of a fast sequence-to-point model based on
CNN/RNN/WaveNet can be implemented with back-propagation. The inputs are sequences of
aggregate energy readingsx while the target values are sequences of appliance energy readingsy. As-
suming an output and the corresponding target value are denoted as ˆ y= ( ˆyt + ⌊L/2⌋, ..., ˆyt + ⌊L/2⌋+r −1)
and y = (yt + ⌊L/2⌋, ...,yt + ⌊L/2⌋+r −1) respectively, the loss can then be calculated using Mean Absolute
Error (MAE) which is used as one of the evaluation criteria (see Section 5.3 for details):
loss (ˆ y, y) = 1
r
⌊L/2⌋+r −1Õ
τ = ⌊L/2⌋
| ˆyt +τ −yt +τ | . (8)
The loss function is calculated on mini-batch data. When the target field size r equals 1, Equation 8
degenerates to the conventional sequence-to-point model. After obtaining the loss, the gradient
can be calculated and used to update the parameters of the model.
4.4 Training a Model for On/off Detection
4.4.1 Regression Based Learning Framework. The regression based learning framework tackles
the problem of on/off detection by utilising the outputs from energy disaggregation. In concrete,
for a given appliance, it first trains a fast sequence-to-point model based on CNN/RNN/WaveNet
for energy disaggregation. Thereafter, given a new sequence of aggregate energy readings, the
energy readings of the appliance are predicated using the disaggregation model. Finally, it derives
the on/off state sequence of the appliance by binarising the predictions according to the on-power
threshold of the appliance.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 10]]
10 J. Jiang et al.
4.4.2 Classification Based Learning Framework. The classification based learning framework tackles
the problem of on/off detection by directly training a binary classifier. In concrete, it first binaries
the energy readings of a given appliance according to the on-power threshold of the appliance.
Thereafter, it trains a binary classifier using the aggregate energy readings as inputs and the
binarsied appliance readings as the target values. Finally, given a new sequence of aggregate energy
readings, the on/off state sequence of the appliance is predicated using the trained classifier.
For training a fast sequence-to-point binary classifier for a given appliance, the last layer of a
CNN/RNN/WaveNet is a fully connected layer followed by a sigmoid nonlinearity to represent the
probability that the appliance is in the on state. Assuming an output and the corresponding target
value are denoted as ˆ z= (ˆzt + ⌊L/2⌋, ..., ˆzt + ⌊L/2⌋+r −1) and z = (zt + ⌊L/2⌋, ..., zt + ⌊L/2⌋+r −1) respectively,
the loss can then be calculated using the binary cross-entropy:
loss(ˆ z, z) = − 1
r
⌊L/2⌋+r −1Õ
τ = ⌊L/2⌋
(zt +τ ln ˆzt +τ + (1 − zt +τ )ln(1 − ˆzt +τ )). (9)
Similarly, the loss function is calculated on mini-batch data. When the target filed size r equals 1,
Equation 9 degenerates to the conventional sequence-to-point model. After obtaining the loss, the
gradient can be calculated and used to update the parameters of the model.
5 EXPERIMENTS
5.1 Dataset
The dataset used in this paper is REFIT [ 21] which is a collection of energy consumption data
from 20 households in the UK. The readings were recorded around every 8 seconds and covers a
period of over 2 years. The dataset contains both house-level energy usage (aggregate readings)
and appliance-level energy usage (appliance readings) of more than 10 types of appliances. In this
paper we focus on the disaggregation of four types of appliances: kettle, microwave, dish washer
and washing machine which are used by most of the households.
5.2 Data Preprocessing
Firstly, we resampled the data with an interval of 10 seconds to mitigate the fluctuations of time
intervals between the original readings, which resulted in 93,976,578 data points. Secondly, following
[14], we filled the gaps in the data shorter than 3 minutes by forward-filling assuming that the gaps
are caused by RF issues and filled the gaps longer than 3 minutes with zeros assuming that the gaps
are caused by the appliance being switched off. Thirdly, for each type of appliance and the aggregate,
we normalised the data by subtracting the mean values and dividing by the corresponding standard
deviations.
Thereafter, for each household, we extracted all the possible segments of length (L + r − 1)
from the aggregate readings by a sliding window of step-size r, where L indicates the size of the
receptive field and r indicates the size of the target field. These segments of aggregate readings
are used as inputs for training and testing. For each of the aggregate segments, we obtained the
corresponding target sequence by extracting a segment of consecutive appliance readings of length
r such that the center of the two segments are aligned. Moreover, we remove any input sequence
and its corresponding target sequence where the target sequence contains an appliance reading
that is larger than the corresponding aggregate reading in the input sequence. Since not every
household has all the four appliances, we used the data from the last four households for testing
and the data from the rest of the households for training, as shown in Table 1.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 11]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 11
Table 1. Households used for training and testing per appliance.
Appliance Training household ID Test household ID
Kettle [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13] [17, 19, 20, 21]
Microwave [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15] [17, 18, 19, 20]
Dishwasher [1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15] [16, 18, 20, 21]
Washing M. [1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17] [18, 19, 20, 21]
As for on/off detection, instead of normalising the appliance readings, we obtain the output data
by binarising the appliance readings using the on power thresholds shown in Table 2 in accordance
with the previous studies [32] and [14].
Table 2. On power threshold for each appliance in watts.
Kettle Microwave Dishwasher Washing M.
On power threshold 2000 200 10 20
5.3 Evaluation Metrics
For the task of energy disaggregation, we used two metrics for evaluation in this paper, i.e. Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) and normalised Signal Aggregate Error (SAE). MAE is a measurement
of errors that averages over the differences between all the predictions with respect to the real
consumptions, which is less sensitive with outliers. SAE is a measurement of errors that sums all
the differences between the predictions and the real consumptions over a period of time, e.g. a
day, a week, a month etc. In our case, the evaluation is over the whole time period of the testing
households’ data collection. The formal definitions of MAE and SAE are as follows:
MAE = 1
T
TÕ
t =1
| ˆyt −yt | (10)
where ˆyt indicates the prediction of an appliance’s energy usage at time t andyt indicates the
corresponding ground truth.
SAE = | ˆr − r |
r (11)
where ˆr = Í
t ˆyt and r = Í
tyt respectively indicate the predicated energy consumption of an
appliance over a certain time period and the corresponding ground truth.
For the task of on/off detection, we used F1 score to evaluate the performance of different models
as the dataset is extremely imbalanced. For example, kettle is on only for about 1% of the time. F1
score [12] can be interpreted as a harmonic average of the precision and recall:
F 1 = 2 × precision × recall
precision + recall . (12)
where precision is the fraction of true positive instances among the predicted positive instances,
while recall is the fraction of true positive instances over the total number of positive instances.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 12]]
12 J. Jiang et al.
In the rest of this paper, when evaluating a model using the metrics above, we remove from the
test set all the pairs of aggregate reading and appliance reading in which the aggregate reading is
less than the individual appliance reading or the aggregate reading is zero.
5.4 Experimental Results For Energy Disaggregation
5.4.1 Experiment Setup. For energy disaggregation, we trained three groups of neural network
models. The first group is based on our implementation of the 5-layer CNN proposed in [32]. The
second group is based on a 3-layer bidirectional RNN with GRUs. The third group is based on the
WaveNet as shown in Section 4.2.3. We use the Adam optimizer [17] with a learning rate of 0.001
to minimise the loss as shown in Equation 8. These hyper-parameters are chosen experimentally.
For each group of models, we explored the influence of two parameters. The first parameter is
the receptive field size L. In this paper, we used input sequences with a range of receptive field
sizes 15, 31, 63, 127, 255, 511, 1023, 2047, which corresponds to numbers of layers 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
in WaveNet models. Note that the receptive field size of1023 and 2047 were not applied to the CNN
and RNN models for the sake of computation cost in training. The second parameter is the target
field size r for which we experimented with four different values 1, 10, 100 and 1000. We used a
mini-batch size of 128 for training all the models.
For most appliances, the duration that an appliance is being used is much smaller than it is not,
i.e., the readings are extremely imbalanced between those representing the appliance is in use and
those representing it is not. For example, the readings that are less than 10 watts is around 99%
for kettle. In such cases, a model that always predicts a very small value, e.g. zero, may perform
well in terms of MAE. Therefore, we employ a naive baseline model, i.e., always predicting zero
(always-zero). The metric SAE focuses on the total energy consumption over a period of time, which
makes the mean value of an appliance’s energy consumption a promising prediction. To this end,
we employ another naive baseline model, i.e., always predicting the mean value (always-mean).
5.4.2 Result Analysis. Table 3 shows the best MAE together with the corresponding SAE achieved
by the models within each group with a fixed target field size of 100. We can see that the WaveNet
model achieves the best MAE over all the four appliances. In particular for dishwasher and washing
machine, the WaveNet model reduces the MAE by 51% and 38% comparing to the CNN model while
by 32% and 14% comparing to the RNN model. As for kettle and microwave, the WaveNet model
and the RNN model obtain similar MAEs. In the case of SAE, the WaveNet model and the RNN
model achieve similar results except for the case of dishwasher where the WaveNet model has
an improvement of 49%. Overall, the WaveNet model outperforms the other two neural network
models and the two naive baselines.
Among the four appliances, microwave is the only one that all the three neural network models
achieve comparable results as that of the model of always-zero and always-mean. A closer inspection
of the REFIT dataset shows that microwaves were mostly operated on either the off mode or the
standby mode (0 to 5 watts) and the latter composes of more than 99.6% of the readings which is
the highest among the four appliances.
To have a visual understanding of the disaggregation results, Figure 5 shows for each type of
appliance an excerpt of the predictions together with the target values with respect to the CNN,
RNN and WaveNet models that achieve the best MAE (as shown in Table 3). It can be seen that
the disaggregation results for kettle are similar among the three models. As for microwave, the
WaveNet model has some predictions that are larger than the target values while the predictions
of the RNN model are mostly smaller than the target values. The CNN model however does not
recognise the operation of the microwave, which is in line with the fact that the corresponding
MAE of the CNN model is similar to that of the always-zero model. As for dishwasher and washing
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 13]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 13
Table 3. The appliance-level mean absolute error (MAE) in unit of watt and signal aggregate error (SAE). Best
results are shown in bold.
Metrics Methods Kettle Microwave Dishwasher Washing M. Overall
MAE Always-zero 10.157 4.386 20.784 6.189 10.378 ± 6.359
CNN [32] 5.454 4.002 21.014 4.970 8.860 ± 7.036
RNN 4.839 3.696 15.261 3.602 6.849 ± 4.880
WaveNet 4.726 3.686 10.296 3.080 5.446 ± 2.860
SAE Always-mean 1.347 0.713 1.121 2.121 1.325 ± 0.512
CNN [32] 0.258 0.797 0.976 0.440 0.617 ± 0.283
RNN 0.249 0.644 0.377 0.208 0.369± 0.170
WaveNet 0.224 0.666 0.192 0.267 0.337± 0.191
machine, the predictions of the WaveNet model are finer and closer to the target values compare to
that of the RNN model, and the predictions of the CNN model are much noisier than the other two
models.
Fig. 5. Excerpts of disaggregation results with respect to the CNN, RNN and WaveNet model achieved the
best MAE.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 14]]
14 J. Jiang et al.
Fig. 6. Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of the CNN, RNN and WaveNet models with different receptive field sizes
for the four appliances.
To investigate how the length of input sequences influences the model performance, we compare
the MAEs achieved by the CNN, RNN and WaveNet models as shown in Figure 6. Note that the
receptive field size of 1023 and 2047 were only applied to the WaveNet models for the sake of
computation cost. The size of the receptive field in general does not have much influence on the
performance of the CNN models compared to the other two groups of models. The RNN models in
general achieve better MAE when the size of the receptive field gets longer but when the receptive
filed size is larger than 255 the performance gets worse. As for the WaveNet models, there is a
clear tendency that its performance is getting better with longer receptive fields in the cases of
dishwasher and washing machine. An explanation is that dishwashers and washing machines have
relatively longer period of operation and the models need more information to capture the energy
consumption patterns. In the case of kettle, the WaveNet models achieve better MAE with the size
of the receptive field getting longer up to 255 and thereafter the performance starts getting worse.
This may be explained by the fact that kettles usually have a short operation time and any longer
receptive field will introduce too much noise.
Training efficiency is also an important factor when comparing models. Figure 7 shows the
training time of the CNN, RNN and WaveNet models. We can see that when the receptive field size
is above 511 the computation time of the CNN models increases quadratically. The WaveNet models
have the lowest computation cost when the receptive field size becomes substantially large (≥ 511)
among the three groups of models. Furthermore, the WaveNet models converge much quicker than
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 15]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 15
Fig. 7. Computation time per iteration for the CNN, RNN and WaveNet models with different receptive field
sizes.
the other two groups of models. For example, for washing machine, the number of iterations that
the CNN models and the RNN models needed for training until convergence is more than 4 times
of that needed by the WaveNet models.
Target field size is a parameter that is worth exploring as well. In Figure 8 we show the relation
between the target field size and the performance of the WaveNet models in terms of MAE with a
fixed receptive field size of 127. We can see that for all the four appliances there is a tendency that
the longer target fields achieve better MAE. This is because the longer target fields provide more
training samples per mini-batch which is similar to the effect of applying a larger batch size and is
more likely to converge to global optima. Comparing to using a larger batch size, the computation
efficiency of using longer target fields is much higher due to shared computations.
5.5 Experimental Results For On/off Detection
5.5.1 Experiment Setup. As for the task of on/off detection, our aim is to compare the performance
of the regression based learning framework and the classification based learning framework as
proposed in Section 4.4. To this end, we trained two groups of WaveNet models following the
two learning frameworks as it has been shown in the previous subsection that WaveNets achieve
the best performance for the task of energy disaggregation. We experimented with a range of
receptive field sizes 15, 31, 63, 127, 255, 511, 1023, 2047. The Adam optimizer is used with a learning
rate of 0.001 to minimise the loss function shown in Equation 8 for the regression based learning
framework and in Equation 9 for the classification based learning framework.
5.5.2 Result Analysis. Figure 9 shows the F1 scores obtained by the WaveNet models trained
respectively under the two learning frameworks with an increasing receptive field size. For the
binary classifier under the classification based learning framework, we use a cut-off probability of
0.3, i.e., when the classifier outputs a value larger than 0.3 we consider the appliance is in the on
state otherwise in the off state.
We can see that in the case of kettle and dishwasher the classification based learning framework
achieves better F1 score than the regression based learning framework when the receptive field
size (or the number of dilated convolutional layers) is small. With larger receptive fields the two
frameworks perform similarly. As for microwave and washing machine, the classification based
learning framework achieves better F1 score than the regression based learning framework over all
the receptive field sizes.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 16]]
16 J. Jiang et al.
Fig. 8. Mean absolute error (MAE) of the WaveNet models with different target field sizes.
6 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we investigated the problem of energy disaggregation together with the problem of
appliance on/off detection. Firstly, we formalised both problems and illustrated the learning/training
paradigms used in the literature, which motivated us to introduce the fast-sequence-to-point
learning paradigm. By comparing with CNN models and RNN models, we studied the application of
the recently proposed WaveNet models to the problem of energy disaggregation. With an evaluation
on a real-world dataset, we showed that our disaggregation models based on WaveNets outperform
the previous works based on CNNs and RNNs. The empirical evidence demonstrates WaveNets’
superiority in handling long sequences. By an extensive experiment with input sequences of
varying receptive field sizes, we have shown how the receptive field size affects the disaggregation
performance for different appliances. Furthermore, we studied the problem of appliance on/off
detection as a natural continuation of the disaggregation problem and investigated the performance
of two learning frameworks: (1) a regression based learning framework utilising the results from
energy disaggregation and (2) a classification based learning framework that directly trains a binary
classifier. We showed empirically that the classification based learning framework outperforms
the regression based learning framework in terms of F1 score. This indicates that for applications
targeting at appliance on/off states, directly training a binary classifier would be a better choice.
For future work, we intend to explore the use of prior knowledge to enhance the learning of
WaveNet models. Another interesting direction for future work is to make use of the on/off states
of the appliances to improve the results of energy disaggregation. For example, we could use the
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 17]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 17
Fig. 9. F1 score of the WaveNet models trained following the two learning frameworks.
on/off states of an appliance to condition the predictions of the amount of energy the appliance
consumes.
7 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was carried out as part of the “HomeSense: digital sensors for social research” project
funded by the Economic and Social Research Council (grant ES/N011589/1) through the National
Centre for Research Methods. Qiuqiang Kong was supported by EPSRC grant EP/N014111/1 “Making
Sense of Sounds” and a Research Scholarship from the China Scholarship Council (CSC) No.
201406150082.
REFERENCES
[1] José Alcalá, Oliver Parson, and Alex Rogers. 2015. Detecting anomalies in activities of daily living of elderly residents
via energy disaggregation and cox processes. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Conference on Embedded
Systems for Energy-Efficient Built Environments. ACM, 225–234.
[2] Kunjin Chen, Qin Wang, Ziyu He, Kunlong Chen, Jun Hu, and Jinliang He. 2018. Convolutional sequence to sequence
non-intrusive load monitoring. The Journal of Engineering (2018), 1860–1864. Issue 17.
[3] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent
neural networks on sequence modeling. In Proceedings of the NIPS 2014 Workshop on Deep Learning and Representation
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 18]]
18 J. Jiang et al.
Learning.
[4] Yann N. Dauphin, Angela Fan, Michael Auli, and David Grangier. 2017. Language modeling with gated convolutional
networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning . JMLR.org, 933–941.
[5] Corinna Fischer. 2008. Feedback on household electricity consumption: a tool for saving energy? Energy Efficiency 1, 1
(2008), 79–104.
[6] Jon Froehlich. 2009. Promoting energy efficient behaviors in the home through feedback: the role of human computer
interaction. In Proceedings of the HCIC 2009 Winter Workshop .
[7] Jon Froehlich, Eric Larson, Sidhant Gupta, Gabe Cohn, Matthew Reynolds, and Shwetak Patel. 2011. Disaggregated
end-use energy sensing for the smart grid. IEEE Pervasive Computing 10, 1 (2011), 28–39.
[8] Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2013. Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing . 6645–6649.
[9] Alon Harell, Stephen Makonin, and Ivan V. Bajić. 2019. WaveNILM: a causal neural network for power disaggregation
from the omplex power signal. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing. 8335–8339.
[10] George W. Hart. 1992. Nonintrusive appliance load monitoring. Proc. IEEE 80, 12 (1992), 1870–1891.
[11] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation 9, 8 (1997), 1735–1780.
[12] László A. Jeni, Jeffrey F. Cohn, and Fernando De La Torre. 2013. Facing imbalanced data–recommendations for the
use of performance metrics. In Proceedings of the 2013 Humaine Association Conference on Affective Computing and
Intelligent Interaction. IEEE Computer Society, 245–251.
[13] Jie Jiang, Mark Hoogendoorn, Diederik Roijers, Qiuqiang Kong, and Nigel Gilbert. 2018. Predicting appliance usage
status in home like environments. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Digital Signal Processing .
[14] Jack Kelly and William Knottenbelt. 2015. Neural NILM: deep neural networks applied to energy disaggregation. In
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Conference on Embedded Systems for Energy-Efficient Built Environments .
ACM, 55–64.
[15] Jack Kelly and William Knottenbelt. 2015. The UK-DALE dataset, domestic appliance-level electricity demand and
whole-house demand from five UK homes. Scientific Data 2, 150007 (2015).
[16] Hyungsul Kim, Manish Marwah, Martin F. Arlitt, Geoff Lyon, and Jiawei Han. 2011. Unsupervised disaggregation
of low frequency power measurements. Proceedings of the 2011 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining 11,
747–758.
[17] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Learning Representations .
[18] J. Zico Kolter and Tommi Jaakkola. 2012. Approximate inference in additive factorial HMMs with application to energy
disaggregation. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . 1472–1482.
[19] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2017. ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural
networks. Commun. ACM 60, 6 (May 2017), 84–90.
[20] Lukas Mauch and Bin Yang. 2015. A new approach for supervised power disaggregation by using a deep recurrent
LSTM network. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing . 63–67.
[21] David Murray, Lina Stankovic, and Vladimir Stankovic. 2017. An electrical load measurements dataset of United
Kingdom households from a two-year longitudinal study. Scientific Data (2017).
[22] Oliver Parson, Siddhartha Ghosh, Mark Weal, and Alex Rogers. 2012. Non-intrusive load monitoring using prior
models of general appliance types. In Proceedings of the 26th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence . AAAI Press,
356–362.
[23] Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. 2013. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning . 1310–1318.
[24] Dario Rethage, Jordi Pons, and Xavier Serra. 2018. A WaveNet for speech denoising. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing . 5069–5073.
[25] Kiarash Shaloudegi, András György, Csaba Szepesvári, and Wilsun Xu. 2016. SDP relaxation with randomized rounding
for energy disaggregation. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .
4985–4993.
[26] Changho Shin, Sunghwan Joo, Jaeryun Yim, Hyoseop Lee, Taesup Moon, , and Wonjong Rhee. 2019. Subtask gated
networks for non-intrusive load monitoring. InProceedings of 33rd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 1150–1157.
[27] Olivier Sidler. 2003. DSM: major findings of an end-use metering campaign in 400 households of four European
countries. In ECEEE Summer Study proceedings . 467–474.
[28] O. Sidler and P. Waide. 1999. Metering matters! Appliance Efficiency 3, 4 (1999).
[29] Tharmakulasingam Sirojan, B. Toan Phung, and Eliathamby Ambikairajah. 2018. Deep neural network based energy
disaggregation. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Smart Energy Grid Engineering . 73–77.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.

[[PAGE 19]]
Energy Disaggregation and Appliance On/Off Detection 19
[30] Aäron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner,
Andrew W. Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. 2016. WaveNet: a generative model for raw audio. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.03499 (2016).
[31] Paul J. Werbos. 1990. Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do it.Proc. IEEE 78, 10 (1990), 1550–1560.
[32] Chaoyun Zhang, Mingjun Zhong, Zongzuo Wang, Nigel Goddard, and Charles Sutton. 2018. Sequence-to-point
learning with neural networks for nonintrusive load monitoring. In Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. 2604–2611.
[33] Mingjun Zhong, Nigel Goddard, and Charles Sutton. 2014. Signal aggregate constraints in additive factorial HMMs,
with application to energy disaggregation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 3590–3598.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: August 2019.